Small teams newsletter (#8550)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/newsletter/small-teams.md

Reviewer: More real world examples and scenarios would be great. 

- Surveys shipped from a small team and aims to have a similar functionality of Surivate/some competitor with 100s of employees. How many employees does Google Analytics have? Web analytics has 1.
- Tom moving from product analytics to data warehouse to gain experience with product analytics before helping with BI for data warehouse

Author: Thanks. Definitely want to work in some more specifics. Great pointers!

The overall goal of small teams is to own an area of the product or company and be structured like an early-stage startup. Sure, these small teams don't have all the functions of a startup, but their spirit and approach to work is exactly the same. 

A lot of the people on our small teams are product engineers – i.e. engineers who also talk to users, and own product decisions. And small teams aren't just for product – our marketing team is a small team, as are customer success, and people and operations. 

This startup-made-of-startups structure minimizes the number of centralized processes and the need for lots of layers of management. It biases to [the maker’s schedule](https://www.paulgraham.com/makersschedule.html) – and makers get shit done.

### 2. They run themselves

Each small team runs its own retrospective and sprint each week, with notes taken and shared in GitHub for the entire company to see.

Small teams also make the final call on which features get into production, with no need for external quality assurance or control. And they can [merge whenever](https://posthog.com/handbook/engineering/development-process#merging).

> Each quarter, every small team at PostHog creates objectives and key results, or OKRs. Our executive team will give feedback on this to keep everyone on track. Beyond that, during each quarter each small team is tasked with maintaining a prioritized roadmap to help them achieve their objectives. Each small team is also tasked with speaking to customers. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each quarter, every small team at PostHog outline their goals and projects for that quarter. We prefer goals orientated around what teams will ship, rather than more abstract goals like "increase conversions by 10%". Our executive team will give feedback on this to keep everyone on track. 
```

And, as each one is like a startup in its own right, they’ve got to cover everything. That means:

> * Monitoring relevant metrics, including those covering usage, quality, and revenue
> * Triage and fix bugs related to the products or areas they’re responsible for
> * Assist the support hero in answering related questions
> * Collaborate with other Small Teams such as marketing
> * Become power users of their area of PostHog and use PostHog in their processes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Prioritizing their roadmap and talking to customers
* Monitoring relevant metrics, including those covering usage, quality, and revenue
* Triage and fix bugs related to the products or areas they’re responsible for
* Assist the support hero in answering related questions
* Collaborate with other Small Teams such as marketing
* Become power users of their area of PostHog and use PostHog in their processes
```

### 3. They have one leader

One of the purposes of the small team structure is to keep a startup’s structure flat even as it scales. That means [minimal layers of management](https://posthog.com/handbook/company/management) and lots of autonomy. 

Each small team has a team lead who is responsible for its performance. It’s not a given that the lead is the most experienced person on the team, but rather the person best-suited to leading the product the team is working on. 

At PostHog, we’ve got an engineering-led culture. And that means that our small teams are normally led by the person with overall responsibility for that product. And that person is very likely to be an engineer.

> Team leaders do not automatically equal managers. Team leads are responsible for making sure that teams perform well and for giving direct feedback. Managers have a different remit and are focused on the happiness of direct reports and setting the right context for people to do their jobs, onboarding new hires, and discussing performance issues with the executive team. A team lead’s remit is deliberately more product-focused.

Reviewer 2: This para still feels a bit loose / unclear to me. Will come back to this.

### 4. They have their own mission

Regardless of size or scope, each team has its own mission that feeds into our overall company mission of equipping every developer to build successful products.

On the [marketing team](https://posthog.com/teams/marketing), the mission is to make PostHog a place for product engineers to learn and collaborate. The [infrastructure team’s mission](https://posthog.com/teams/infrastructure) is to make deploying, scaling, and managing PostHog easy, fast, and reliable. But a charter is more than a mission. Small team charters also need to include:

* Long-term goals
* A description of what the team does
* A target customer
* Details of who’s on the team
* Key metrics

> All of this information is in our [handbook](https://posthog.com/handbook) and updated when changes are made and confirmed each quarter. This keeps everyone on the same page and makes it easy for anyone within the company to quickly find out what other teams are working on and why.

Reviewer 2: Couple of notes here:

- You introduce the idea of a charter vs mission, but it's not super clear why / what the difference is.
- Can we switch out the marketing team example for another team? I think we need to update our mission as it feels a bit out of date.

### 5. They’re flexible

We’d rather hire new people than keep moving people around to fill gaps. That said, we’re happy for people to move between teams when needed, ideally no more often than every three to nine months. There are two scenarios that could trigger a move:

* A small team may realize they no longer need someone, or that they could use the help of someone internally on another small team.
* Someone might want to move to another small team to develop their skills or experience.

Rather than the team lead making the call, it’s always the manager who decides if one of their direct reports should move between teams. But, once in a small team, you’re only in one team. Someone being in multiple small teams at once defeats the purpose of ownership.

> If someone feels the need to be in more than one small team, that likely means we need to hire. That can mean we’re ‘overstaffed’ at times, but ultimately good people will do good work to push our product forward. And it’s better to have slightly overstaffed small teams than to be perpetually understaffed and for your product to suffer as a result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If someone feels the need to be in more than one small team, that likely means we need to hire. That can mean we’re ‘overstaffed’ at times, but ultimately good people will do good work to push our product forward. And it’s better to have slightly overstaffed small teams than to be perpetually understaffed, and for your product to suffer as a result.
```

> Small teams are also able to work with other small teams on multidisciplinary projects and members of one small team can and should attend meetings on other small teams to help with collaboration if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Small teams are also able to work with other small teams on multidisciplinary projects, and members of one small team can and should attend meetings on other small teams to help with collaboration if needed.
```

### The tradeoffs of small teams

Small teams aren’t perfect. And sometimes, to make them work, we’ve had to create workarounds and accept some tradeoffs.

> - **They clash.** Our small teams do sometimes clash, especially when more than one team is working on the same product. We mitigate this by being aggressively transparent. We also have a list of everything we do [and who owns it](/handbook/engineering/feature-ownership). This helps avoid clashes by clearly establishing feature ownership.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **They overlap.** Some overlap is inevitable, especially when teams work on features that are used across multiple products. We mitigate this by being [aggressively transparent](/founders/how-to-run-a-transparent-company). We also have a list of everything we do [and who owns it](/handbook/engineering/feature-ownership), so it's easy to see who someone should talk to about a shared problem.
```

Each small team has a team lead who is responsible for its performance. It’s not a given that the lead is the most experienced person on the team, but rather the person best-suited to leading the product the team is working on. 

At PostHog, we’ve got an engineering-led culture. And that means that our small teams are normally led by the person with overall responsibility for that product. And that person is very likely to be an engineer.

Team leaders do not automatically equal managers. Team leads are responsible for making sure that teams perform well and for giving direct feedback. Managers have a different remit and are focused on the happiness of direct reports and setting the right context for people to do their jobs, onboarding new hires, and discussing performance issues with the executive team. A team lead’s remit is deliberately more product-focused.

### 4. They have their own mission

Regardless of size or scope, each team has its own mission that feeds into our overall company mission of equipping every developer to build successful products.

> On the [marketing team](https://posthog.com/teams/marketing), the mission is to make PostHog a place for product engineers to learn and collaborate. The [infrastructure team’s mission](https://posthog.com/teams/infrastructure) is to make deploying, scaling, and managing PostHog easy, fast, and reliable. But a charter is more than a mission. Small team charters also need to include:

Author: ```suggestion
On the [growth team](https://posthog.com/teams/growth), the mission is to maximize the number of people who get value out of PostHog, and help them realize and leverage all the value we offer. The [infrastructure team’s mission](https://posthog.com/teams/infrastructure) is to make deploying, scaling, and managing PostHog easy, fast, and reliable. As well as a main mission, each small team also sets:
```

- **They overlap.** Some overlap is inevitable, especially when teams work on features that are used across multiple products. We mitigate this by being [aggressively transparent](/founders/how-to-run-a-transparent-company). We also have a list of everything we do [and who owns it](/handbook/engineering/feature-ownership), so it's easy to see who someone should talk to about a shared problem.

- **Fuzzy ownership.** This isn’t unique to small teams, but we still mitigate against it. If a product or project doesn't have a clear owner, our [fuzzy ownership process](/handbook/company/fuzzy-ownership) encourages people to create a PR and find a solution. If a problem is big enough and it doesn't have owner, we sometimes form a temporary team just to solve that problem. We also [actively encourage](https://posthog.com/handbook/values) people to step on toes in a low-ego way. 

- **Speed over seamlessness.** Small teams allow us to ship fast. But the tradeoff here is that we tolerate some level of not-so-great integration in exchange for speed. This isn't a problem unique to PostHog. AWS is a great example of a very, very big company that favours speed over integration.

> - **Add more small teams!** We want to avoid having big, slow teams. In doing so, we’ve kept adding more small teams. This is a hypothetical concern, but creating too many small teams could bottleneck each other. 

Author: ```suggestion
- **Bottlenecks** We want to avoid having big, slow teams. In doing so, we’ve kept adding more small teams. This is a hypothetical concern, but creating too many small teams could bottleneck each other. 
```

First, a crash course in how PostHog is structured. Right, now, we're 47 people spread across ten countries working asynchronously and [shipping fast](changelog/2024). We're split into 12 small teams, most of which cover individual products such as data warehouse, replay, pipeline, or product analytics. But we also have small teams covering non-engineering areas, like people and operations and marketing. 

When we launch a new product, or a project on an existing team becomes too hot to handle, we often spin out a new small team. We're in the process of creating two new small teams right now – one focussed on Hog, PostHog's first ever programming language, and another focussed on customer communications and community. This allows us to push forward with new ideas and keep shipping without sacrificing quality.

Creating small teams allows us to move fast. Our [surveys product](/surveys), which aims to have similar functionality to competitors with hundreds of employees, shipped from a small team. Our [web analytics product](https://posthog.com/teams/web-analytics), which goes up against Google Analytics, is run by a small team with one person, the brilliant Robbie Coomber.

> The small teams structure is core to how we've [designed our company for speed](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/how-to-design-your-company-for-speed). Here are the golden rules of small teams – and some pitfalls to be wary of.

Author: ```suggestion
Yes, there are tradeoffs and the small teams structure won't work for everyone. But, right now, it's working really well for us.

### How small teams work at PostHog

First, a crash course in how PostHog is structured. Right, now, we're 47 people spread across ten countries working asynchronously and [shipping fast](changelog/2024). We're split into 12 small teams, most of which cover individual products such as data warehouse, replay, pipeline, or product analytics. But we also have small teams covering non-engineering areas, like people and operations and marketing. 

When we launch a new product, or a project on an existing team becomes too hot to handle, we often spin out a new small team. We're in the process of creating two new small teams right now – one focussed on Hog, PostHog's first ever programming language, and another [focussed on customer comms](https://posthog.com/teams/customer-comms). This allows us to push forward with new ideas and keep shipping without sacrificing quality.

Creating small teams allows us to move fast. Our [surveys product](/surveys), for example, which aims to have similar functionality to competitors with hundreds of employees, was shipped from a small team.

The small teams structure is core to how we've [designed our company for speed](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/how-to-design-your-company-for-speed). Here are the golden rules of small teams – and some pitfalls to be wary of.
```

The first rule of small teams? They’ve got to be small. Really small. That means between two and six people. More than this and you have a department, which is exactly what the small teams structure is designed to avoid. Less than two people and, well, you don’t have a team.

The overall goal of small teams is to own an area of the product or company and be structured like an early-stage startup. Sure, these small teams don't have all the functions of a startup, but their spirit and approach to work is exactly the same. 

At PostHog, we’ve got [14 small teams](https://posthog.com/teams) ranging in size from one person (we’re working on that) to six people. These teams cover everything from product analytics, to session replay, data warehouse, pipeline, and so on. What does owning an area of the product mean? Simply put, everything related to that product. But with a particular focus on:

1. Usage
2. Quality
3. Revenue

A lot of the people on our small teams are product engineers – i.e. engineers who also talk to users, and own product decisions. And small teams aren't just for product – our marketing team is a small team, as are customer success, and people and operations. 

> This startup-made-of-startups structure minimizes the number of centralized processes and the need for lots of layers of management. It biases to [the maker’s schedule](https://www.paulgraham.com/makersschedule.html) – and makers get shit done.

Author: Yup, cut most of it but left in reference to non-engineering small teams as we've cut that elsewhere.

### They have one leader

One of the purposes of the small team structure is to keep a startup’s structure flat even as it scales. That means [minimal layers of management](https://posthog.com/handbook/company/management) and lots of autonomy. 

Each small team has a team lead who is responsible for its performance. It’s not a given that the lead is the most experienced person on the team, but rather the person best-suited to leading the product the team is working on. 

At PostHog, we’ve got an engineering-led culture. And that means that our small teams are normally led by the person with overall responsibility for that product. And that person is very likely to be an engineer.

Team leaders do not automatically equal managers. Team leads are responsible for making sure that teams perform well and for giving direct feedback. Managers have a different remit and are focused on the happiness of direct reports and setting the right context for people to do their jobs, onboarding new hires, and discussing performance issues with the executive team. A team lead’s remit is deliberately more product-focused.

> ### They don’t clash

Reviewer 2: I feel like this, or a version of it, might be better in the trade-offs section? In reality, the small teams do inevitably clash sometimes because some elements of the product are shared, it's who we deal with that counts.

### They have their own mission

Regardless of size or scope, each team has its own mission that feeds into our overall company mission of equipping every developer to build successful products.

On the [marketing team](https://posthog.com/teams/marketing), the mission is to make PostHog a place for product engineers to learn and collaborate. The [infrastructure team’s mission](https://posthog.com/teams/infrastructure) is to make deploying, scaling, and managing PostHog easy, fast, and reliable. But a charter is more than a mission. Small team charters also need to include:

* Long-term goals
* A description of what the team does
* A target customer
* Details of who’s on the team
* Key metrics

All of this information is in our [handbook](https://posthog.com/handbook) and updated when changes are made and confirmed each quarter. This keeps everyone on the same page and makes it easy for anyone within the company to quickly find out what other teams are working on and why.

> ### They're not just engineers

Reviewer 2: I feel like we can lose this one. Open to counter argument, but it doesn't feel essential atm.

Author: Yeah, I'm not especially wedded to it so happy to cut. Will add it in as a line elsewhere to make the point that small teams aren't just engineering.

We're also creating a new team with the mission of making our customer data platform (CDP) a first-class product [link to team page] – a project spun out from a Hackathon project at our recent all-company offsite in Mykonos. [link]

## The golden rules of small teams

The small teams structure is core to how we've [designed our company for speed](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/how-to-design-your-company-for-speed), but they only work if you follow these rules. 

### 1. They need to be genuinely small

The first rule of small teams? They’ve got to be small – two to six people. More than this and you have a department, which is what we're trying to avoid. Less than two people and, well, you don’t have a team. 

Small teams are effectively one pizza teams, as opposed to the [two-pizza teams](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/whitepapers/latest/introduction-devops-aws/two-pizza-teams.html) idea popularized by Amazon. 

The overall goal of small teams is to own an area of the product or company and be structured like an early-stage startup. Sure, these small teams don't have all the functions of a startup, but their spirit and approach to work is exactly the same. 

> At PostHog, we’ve got [14 small teams](https://posthog.com/teams) ranging in size from one person (we’re working on that) to six people. These teams cover everything from product analytics, to session replay, data warehouse, pipeline, and so on. What does owning an area of the product mean? Simply put, everything related to that product. But with a particular focus on:
> 
> 1. Usage
> 2. Quality
> 3. Revenue
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

### They have one leader

One of the purposes of the small team structure is to keep a startup’s structure flat even as it scales. That means [minimal layers of management](https://posthog.com/handbook/company/management) and lots of autonomy. 

Each small team has a team lead who is responsible for its performance. It’s not a given that the lead is the most experienced person on the team, but rather the person best-suited to leading the product the team is working on. 

At PostHog, we’ve got an engineering-led culture. And that means that our small teams are normally led by the person with overall responsibility for that product. And that person is very likely to be an engineer.

Team leaders do not automatically equal managers. Team leads are responsible for making sure that teams perform well and for giving direct feedback. Managers have a different remit and are focused on the happiness of direct reports and setting the right context for people to do their jobs, onboarding new hires, and discussing performance issues with the executive team. A team lead’s remit is deliberately more product-focused.

> ### They don’t clash
> 
> Creating a startup full of startups sounds like a recipe for people duplicating work or stepping on toes, right? Wrong. If you combine a small team structure with a transparent culture where everything is as public as possible and, ideally, written down, then everyone should have more than enough context of what others are working on and why. 
> 
> At PostHog, we have a list of everything we do [and who owns it](/handbook/engineering/feature-ownership). This helps avoid clashes by clearly establishing feature ownership. If a product or project doesn't have a clear owner, our [fuzzy ownership process](/handbook/company/fuzzy-ownership) encourages people to create a PR and find a solution.
> 
> 
> Giving clear ownership over products and projects to individuals or individual teams also lessens the risk of overlap.
> 
> We’ve got a small number of product managers who help small teams prioritize, create and update dashboards, conduct competitor analysis, and speak to customers. But we also expect product engineers to be true experts of the product they’re building and understand our customers. Product managers also ensure cross-team alignment, an important task in a completely remote, asynchronous company.
> 
> So what about stepping on toes? Well, we [actively encourage that](https://posthog.com/handbook/values). Everyone at PostHog should be raising pull requests in GitHub or proposing changes to stuff that doesn't have anything to do with your small team. Why? Because it shows they really care and they really understand the product.

Author: ```suggestion
```

### They have their own mission

Regardless of size or scope, each team has its own mission that feeds into our overall company mission of equipping every developer to build successful products.

On the [marketing team](https://posthog.com/teams/marketing), the mission is to make PostHog a place for product engineers to learn and collaborate. The [infrastructure team’s mission](https://posthog.com/teams/infrastructure) is to make deploying, scaling, and managing PostHog easy, fast, and reliable. But a charter is more than a mission. Small team charters also need to include:

* Long-term goals
* A description of what the team does
* A target customer
* Details of who’s on the team
* Key metrics

All of this information is in our [handbook](https://posthog.com/handbook) and updated when changes are made and confirmed each quarter. This keeps everyone on the same page and makes it easy for anyone within the company to quickly find out what other teams are working on and why.

> ### They're not just engineers
> 
> Yes, the vast majority of our small teams are stuffed full of engineers shipping new features. Right now, 70% of our team is engineers. But everyone at PostHog is on a small team. That means we run our marketing team like a mini startup, and our people and operations team. 
> 
> What does this mean in practice? It means adopting a startup mentality, regardless of what role you do. Our [marketing team](/marketing) has a mission, just like our [growth team](/growth). And all of our small teams, engineering-focused and non-engineering focused, regularly ship new products and features. Structuring all functions of a company as small teams has helped us maintain speed, autonomy, and innovation across the board.

Author: ```suggestion
```

* A small team may realize they no longer need someone, or that they could use the help of someone internally on another small team.
* Someone might want to move to another small team to develop their skills or experience.

Rather than the team lead making the call, it’s always the manager who decides if one of their direct reports should move between teams. But, once in a small team, you’re only in one team. Someone being in multiple small teams at once defeats the purpose of ownership.

If someone feels the need to be in more than one small team, that likely means we need to hire. That can mean we’re ‘overstaffed’ at times, but ultimately good people will do good work to push our product forward. And it’s better to have slightly overstaffed small teams than to be perpetually understaffed and for your product to suffer as a result.

Small teams are also able to work with other small teams on multidisciplinary projects and members of one small team can and should attend meetings on other small teams to help with collaboration if needed.

### 

> ### The tradeoffs of small teams
> 
> Our small teams structure is a success because we work hard on making it one. There are tradeoffs. 
> 
> Working as a series of startups within a startup risks creating silos and there could be whole teams or individual team members who drift away from our mission or feel disconnected from the company. 
> 
> To help alleviate this, all of our small teams have annual off-sites in addition to our big company get-together. Everyone also has a generous quarterly travel budget and people are encouraged to go work with colleagues either on the same small team as them or in another part of the company. We mix things up and spend time together IRL to work on problems and get things shipped.
> 
> Small teams also require that everyone is very good at written communication, be it a Slack message, or a Github pull request or issue. This helps everyone at the company to both see and understand what's being worked on and why.
> 
> You also need to hire the right people to work on small teams. Not everyone will embrace this way of working. It requires people who take extreme ownership of ideas, are self-starting, authentic, and low-ego. We call them cracked engineers. And we have some [strong thoughts](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/hiring-and-managing-cracked-engineers) on what makes an engineer cracked.

Author: ```suggestion
### The tradeoffs of small teams

Small teams aren’t perfect. And sometimes, to make them work, we’ve had to create workarounds and accept some tradeoffs.

- **They clash.** Our small teams do sometimes clash, especially when more than one team is working on the same product. We mitigate this by being aggressively transparent. We also have a list of everything we do [and who owns it](/handbook/engineering/feature-ownership). This helps avoid clashes by clearly establishing feature ownership.  

- **Fuzzy ownership.** This isn’t unique to small teams, but we still mitigate against it. If a product or project doesn't have a clear owner, our [fuzzy ownership process](/handbook/company/fuzzy-ownership) encourages people to create a PR and find a solution. We also [actively encourage that](https://posthog.com/handbook/values) people to step on toes in a low-ego way. 

- **Speed over seamlessness.** Small teams allow us to ship fast. But the tradeoff here is that we tolerate some level of not-so-great integration in exchange for speed. This isn't a problem unique to PostHog. AWS is a great example of a very, very big company that favours speed over integration.

- **Add more small teams!** We want to avoid having big, slow teams. In doing so, we’ve kept adding more small teams. This is a hypothetical concern, but creating too many small teams could bottleneck each other. 

- **You’ve got to hire right.** Not everyone will embrace this way of working. It requires people who take extreme ownership of ideas, are self-starting, authentic, and low-ego. We call them cracked engineers. And we have some [strong thoughts](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/hiring-and-managing-cracked-engineers) on what makes an engineer cracked.

```

---

> title: The secret to shipping really fast

Reviewer 2: We already have "How to design your company for speed" so we need a different headline for this.

Some options:
- The magic of one pizza teams (reference to an Amazon thing, we could work this into the introduction)
- Why and how we built our startup around small teams
- How small teams work and why they win

Author: Yup, will have a think and update.

> title: The secret to shipping really fast

Author: ```suggestion
title: Why and how we built our startup around small teams
```

date: 2024-05-28
author:
  - james-temperton
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/v1711656184/posthog.com/contents/images/newsletter/remote-work/remote_hog.png
featuredImageType: full
tags:
  - Culture
crosspost:
  - Founders
  - Blog
---

> Startups ship more stuff per person than big companies. At PostHog, we ship fast even for a startup. How? The magic of small teams. Basically, we’re growing as a company by creating a bunch of internal startups to keep us speedy, autonomous, and innovative. 

Author: ```suggestion
Startups ship [more](https://medium.com/the-year-of-the-looking-glass/start-ups-versus-big-companies-f275800e78e5) [stuff](https://www.quora.com/Why-are-startups-and-small-companies-better-at-anything-compared-to-large-firms-if-large-firms-have-so-much-more-resources) per person than big companies. At PostHog, we ship fast even for a startup. How? The magic of small teams. Basically, we’re growing as a company by creating a bunch of internal startups to keep us speedy, autonomous, and innovative. 
```

This allows us to scale without falling into an organizational trap of having lots of big, separate functions that slow down communication, stifle innovation, and stop people from seeing the impact of their work.

> This is how small teams work, and why they’re important.

Author: ```suggestion
Yes, there are tradeoffs and the small teams structure won't work for everyone. But, right now, it works for us. And maybe it could work for you and your company, too. 

This is how small teams work, and why they’re important.
```

Reviewer 2: - I'd drop the 'And maybe it could for you... etc.' bit.
- It's comms and support, not community afaik.
- Maybe the web analytics example isn't a great one? Afaik, I think James and Tim came to conclusion teams of 1 are best avoided in future. Also, Robbie is technically part of the product analytics team as well, afaik.

### Small teams are actually small

The first rule of small teams? They’ve got to be small. Really small. That means between two and six people. More than this and you have a department, which is exactly what the small teams structure is designed to avoid. Less than two people and, well, you don’t have a team.

> The overall goal of small teams is to own an area of the product or company and be structured as close to a startup as possible. At PostHog, we’ve got [14 small teams](https://posthog.com/teams) ranging in size from one person (we’re working on that) to six people. These teams cover everything from product analytics, to session replay, data warehouse, pipeline, and so on. What does owning an area of the product mean? Simply put, everything related to that product. But with a particular focus on:

Reviewer 2: This is definitely language we've used in the past, but I see your point. Perhaps it's more about harnessing the energy of an early-stage startup within each team? They don't have the functions of a whole company, it's more about the spirit of a very small, early-stage team.

> The overall goal of small teams is to own an area of the product or company and be structured as close to a startup as possible. At PostHog, we’ve got [14 small teams](https://posthog.com/teams) ranging in size from one person (we’re working on that) to six people. These teams cover everything from product analytics, to session replay, data warehouse, pipeline, and so on. What does owning an area of the product mean? Simply put, everything related to that product. But with a particular focus on:

Author: Yeah, lemme tweak this to reflect that nuance.

> The overall goal of small teams is to own an area of the product or company and be structured as close to a startup as possible. At PostHog, we’ve got [14 small teams](https://posthog.com/teams) ranging in size from one person (we’re working on that) to six people. These teams cover everything from product analytics, to session replay, data warehouse, pipeline, and so on. What does owning an area of the product mean? Simply put, everything related to that product. But with a particular focus on:

Author: ```suggestion
The overall goal of small teams is to own an area of the product or company and be structured like an early-stage startup. Sure, these small teams don't have all the functions of a startup, but their spirit and approach to work is exactly the same. At PostHog, we’ve got [14 small teams](https://posthog.com/teams) ranging in size from one person (we’re working on that) to six people. These teams cover everything from product analytics, to session replay, data warehouse, pipeline, and so on. What does owning an area of the product mean? Simply put, everything related to that product. But with a particular focus on:
```

1. Usage
2. Quality
3. Revenue

> A lot of the people on our small teams are product engineers, but we might also have product managers or designers on small teams to help ship the product the team owns. And it’s not just for product – our marketing team is a small team, as are customer success, and people and operations. This startup-made-of-startups structure minimizes the number of centralized processes and the need for lots of layers of management. It biases to [the maker’s schedule](https://www.paulgraham.com/makersschedule.html) – and makers get shit done.

Author: ```suggestion
A lot of the people on our small teams are product engineers And small teams aren't just for product – our marketing team is a small team, as are customer success, and people and operations. This startup-made-of-startups structure minimizes the number of centralized processes and the need for lots of layers of management. It biases to [the maker’s schedule](https://www.paulgraham.com/makersschedule.html) – and makers get shit done.
```

### They run themselves

Each small team runs its own retrospective and sprint each week, with notes taken and shared in GitHub for the entire company to see.

> Small teams also make the final call on which features get into production, with no need for external quality assurance or control. If the thing being worked on is within our existing release schedule, then it’s good to go.

Author: ```suggestion
Small teams also make the final call on which features get into production, with no need for external quality assurance or control. And they can [merge whenever](https://posthog.com/handbook/engineering/development-process#merging).
```

And, as each one is like a startup in its own right, they’ve got to cover everything. That means:

* Monitoring relevant metrics, including those covering usage, quality, and revenue
* Triage and fix bugs related to the products or areas they’re responsible for
* Assist the support hero in answering related questions
* Collaborate with other Small Teams such as marketing
* Become power users of their area of PostHog and use PostHog in their processes

### They have one leader

One of the purposes of the small team structure is to keep a startup’s structure flat even as it scales. That means [minimal layers of management](https://posthog.com/handbook/company/management) and lots of autonomy. 

Each small team has a team lead who is responsible for its performance. It’s not a given that the lead is the most experienced person on the team, but rather the person best-suited to leading the product the team is working on. 

At PostHog, we’ve got an engineering-led culture. And that means that our small teams are normally led by the person with overall responsibility for that product. And that person is very likely to be an engineer.

> Team leaders do not automatically equal managers. Team leads are responsible for making sure that teams perform well and for giving direct feedback. Managers have a different remit and are focused on the happiness and career progression of direct reports, onboarding new hires, and discussing performance issues with the executive team. A team lead’s remit is deliberately more product-focused.

Author: ```suggestion
Team leaders do not automatically equal managers. Team leads are responsible for making sure that teams perform well and for giving direct feedback. Managers have a different remit and are focused on the happiness of direct reports and setting the right context for people to do their jobs, onboarding new hires, and discussing performance issues with the executive team. A team lead’s remit is deliberately more product-focused.
```

> Team leaders do not automatically equal managers. Team leads are responsible for making sure that teams perform well and for giving direct feedback. Managers have a different remit and are focused on the happiness and career progression of direct reports, onboarding new hires, and discussing performance issues with the executive team. A team lead’s remit is deliberately more product-focused.

Reviewer 2: Also, I think it's fair to say that most team leaders are managers at this point? Can't think of any examples of people who aren't both now.

> Team leaders do not automatically equal managers. Team leads are responsible for making sure that teams perform well and for giving direct feedback. Managers have a different remit and are focused on the happiness and career progression of direct reports, onboarding new hires, and discussing performance issues with the executive team. A team lead’s remit is deliberately more product-focused.

Author: Yeah I was thinking this when reading through the handbook and associated docs. I'm happy to rework this so it's accurate but not 100% sure what accurate is.

> ### They don’t clash

Reviewer: - What would a potential clash might look like?
- What do we do about projects without clear owners?

> Creating a startup full of startups sounds like a recipe for people duplicating work or stepping on toes, right? Wrong. If you combine a small team structure with a transparent culture where everything is as public as possible and, ideally, written down, then everyone should have more than enough context of what others are working on and why. 

Author: ```suggestion
Creating a startup full of startups sounds like a recipe for people duplicating work or stepping on toes, right? Wrong. If you combine a small team structure with a transparent culture where everything is as public as possible and, ideally, written down, then everyone should have more than enough context of what others are working on and why. 

At PostHog, we have a list of everything we do [and who owns it](/handbook/engineering/feature-ownership). This helps avoid clashes by clearly establishing feature ownership. If a product or project doesn't have a clear owner, our [fuzzy ownership process](/handbook/company/fuzzy-ownership) encourages people to create a PR and find a solution.

```

### They have their own mission

Regardless of size or scope, each team has its own mission that feeds into our overall company mission of equipping every developer to build successful products.

On the [marketing team](https://posthog.com/teams/marketing), the mission is to make PostHog a place for product engineers to learn and collaborate. The [infrastructure team’s mission](https://posthog.com/teams/infrastructure) is to make deploying, scaling, and managing PostHog easy, fast, and reliable. But a charter is more than a mission. Small team charters also need to include:

* Long-term goals
* A description of what the team does
* A target customer
* Details of who’s on the team
* Key metrics

All of this information is in our [handbook](https://posthog.com/handbook) and updated when changes are made and confirmed each quarter. This keeps everyone on the same page and makes it easy for anyone within the company to quickly find out what other teams are working on and why.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

### They're not just engineers

Yes, the vast majority of our small teams are stuffed full of engineers shipping new features. Right now, 70% of our team is engineers. But everyone at PostHog is on a small team. That means we run our marketing team like a mini startup, and our people and operations team. 

What does this mean in practice? It means adopting a startup mentality, regardless of what role you do. Our [marketing team](/marketing) has a mission, just like our [growth team](/growth). And all of our small teams, engineering-focused and non-engineering focused, regularly ship new products and features. Structuring all functions of a company as small teams has helped us maintain speed, autonomy, and innovation across the board.
```

### They’re flexible

> We’d rather hire new people than keep moving people around to fill gaps. That said, we’re happy for people to move between teams when needed, ideally no more often than every three to nine months. There are two scenarios that could trigger a move:

Reviewer 2: 3 to 9 months seems like a super wide window. Where is this from?

Author: > We try to keep moves infrequent and when needed. We anticipate moving people roughly every 3-9 months. We'd rather hire new people than create gaps by shifting people around.

https://posthog.com/handbook/company/small-teams

* A small team may realize they no longer need someone, or that they could use the help of someone internally on another small team.
* Someone might want to move to another small team to develop their skills or experience.

Rather than the team lead making the call, it’s always the manager who decides if one of their direct reports should move between teams. But, once in a small team, you’re only in one team. Someone being in multiple small teams at once defeats the purpose of ownership.

If someone feels the need to be in more than one small team, that likely means we need to hire. That can mean we’re ‘overstaffed’ at times, but ultimately good people will do good work to push our product forward. And it’s better to have slightly overstaffed small teams than to be perpetually understaffed and for your product to suffer as a result.

> Small teams are also able to work with other small teams on multidisciplinary projects and members of one small team can and should attend meetings on other small teams to help with collaboration if needed.

Author: ```suggestion
Small teams are also able to work with other small teams on multidisciplinary projects and members of one small team can and should attend meetings on other small teams to help with collaboration if needed.

### 

### The tradeoffs of small teams

Our small teams structure is a success because we work hard on making it one. There are tradeoffs. 

Working as a series of startups within a startup risks creating silos and there could be whole teams or individual team members who drift away from our mission or feel disconnected from the company. 

To help alleviate this, all of our small teams have annual off-sites in addition to our big company get-together. Everyone also has a generous quarterly travel budget and people are encouraged to go work with colleagues either on the same small team as them or in another part of the company. We mix things up and spend time together IRL to work on problems and get things shipped.

Small teams also require that everyone is very good at written communication, be it a Slack message, or a Github pull request or issue. This helps everyone at the company to both see and understand what's being worked on and why.

You also need to hire the right people to work on small teams. Not everyone will embrace this way of working. It requires people who take extreme ownership of ideas, are self-starting, authentic, and low-ego. We call them cracked engineers. And we have some [strong thoughts](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/hiring-and-managing-cracked-engineers) on what makes an engineer cracked.
```

Reviewer 2: Don't think this works atm. I think:

- Let's bullet point this with bold headings, so it's easier to scan.
- These tradeoffs feel a little surface level atm. I think it's worth chatting to James and/or Tim to get their takes / brainstorm some more fundamental things.
- Also, there are probably one or two problems with small teams that we just accept in return for the benefits.

Author: @jamesefhawkins tagging you here for any immediate thoughts, but also happy to jump on a call/take to Slack DMs and talk through the tradeoffs of small teams, what the pitfalls might be, what we do to mitigate against them, why small teams won't work for every startup, etc. and when this structure might stop working for us.
